In the days when the spinning-wheels hummed busily in the
farmhouses - and even great ladies, clothed in silk and
thread lace, had their toy spinning-wheels of polished oak -
there might be seen in districts far away among the lanes,
or deep in the bosom of the hills, certain pallid undersized
men, who, by the side of the brawny country-folk, looked
like the remnants of a disinherited race.  The shepherd's dog
barked fiercely when one of these alien-looking men
appeared on the upland, dark against the early winter sunset;
for what dog likes a figure bent under a heavy bag? -
and these pale men rarely stirred abroad without that
mysterious burden.  The shepherd himself, though he had
good reason to believe that the bag held nothing but flaxen
thread, or else the long rolls of strong linen spun from
hello my name is shivam
good bye goodbye
thankyou
thank you
hello
that thread, was not quite sure that this trade of weaving,
indispensable though it was, could be carried on entirely
without the help of the Evil One.  In that far-off time
superstition clung easily round every person or thing that was at
all unwonted, or even intermittent and occasional merely,
like the visits of the pedlar or the knife-grinder.  No one
knew where wandering men had their homes or their origin;
and how was a man to be explained unless you at least knew
somebody who knew his father and mother?  To the
peasant of old times, the world outside their own direct
experience was a region of vagueness and mystery: to their
untravelled thought a state of wandering was a conception as
dim as the winter life of the swallows that came back with
the spring; and even a settler, if he came from distant parts,
hardly ever ceased to be viewed with a remnant of distrust,
which would have prevented any surprise if a long course of
inoffensive conduct on his part had ended in the commission
of a crime; especially if he had any reputation for
knowledge, or showed any skill in handicraft.  All cleverness,
whether in the rapid use of that difficult instrument the
tongue, or in some other art unfamiliar to villagers, was in
itself suspicious: honest folk, born and bred in a visible
manner, were mostly not over-wise or clever - at least, not
beyond such a matter as knowing the signs of the weather;
and the process by which rapidity and dexterity of any kind
were acquired was so wholly hidden, that they partook of the
nature of conjuring.  In this way it came to pass that those
scattered linen-weavers - emigrants from the town  into the
country - were to the last regarded as aliens by their rustic
neighbours, and usually contracted the eccentric habits
which belong to a state of loneliness.
In the early years of this century, such a linen-weaver,
named Silas Marner, worked at his vocation in a stone cottage
that stood among the nutty hedgerows near the village
of Raveloe, and not far from the edge of a deserted stone-pit.
The questionable sound of Silas's loom, so unlike the natural
cheerful trotting of the winnowing-machine, or the simpler
rhythm of the flail, had a half-fearful fascination for the
Raveloe boys, who would often leave off their nutting or
bird's-nesting to peep in at the window of the stone cottage,
counterbalancing a certain awe at the mysterious action of
the loom, by a pleasant sense of scornful superiority, drawn
from the mockery of its alternating noises, along with the
bent, tread-mill attitude of the weaver.  But sometimes it
happened that Marner, pausing to adjust an irregularity in
his thread, became aware of the small scoundrels, and,
though chary of his time, he liked their intrusion so ill that
he would descend from his loom, and, opening the door,
would fix on them a gaze that was always enough to make
them take to their legs in terror.  For how was it possible to
believe that those large brown protuberant eyes in Silas
Marner's pale face really saw nothing very distinctly that
was not close to them, and not rather that their dreadful
stare could dart cramp, or rickets, or a wry mouth at any boy
who happened to be in the rear? They had, perhaps, heard
their fathers and mothers hint that Silas Marner could cure
folks' rheumatism if he had a mind, and add, still more
darkly, that if you could only speak the devil fair enough, he
might save you the cost of the doctor.  Such strange lingering
echoes of the old demon-worship might perhaps even now
be caught by the diligent listener among the grey-haired
peasantry; for the rude mind with difficulty associates the
ideas of power and benignity.  A shadowy conception of
power that by much persuasion can be induced to refrain
from inflicting harm, is the shape most easily taken by the
sense of the Invisible in the minds of men who have always
been pressed close by primitive wants, and to whom a life
of hard toil has never been illuminated by any enthusiastic
religious faith.  To them pain and mishap present a far
wider range of possibilities than gladness and enjoyment:
their imagination is almost barren of the images that feed
desire and hope, but is all overgrown by recollections that
are a perpetual pasture to fear.  "Is there anything you can
fancy that you would like to eat?" I once said to an old
labouring man, who was in his last illness, and who had
refused all the food his wife had offered him.  "No," he answered,
"I've never been used to nothing but common victual,
and I can't eat that."  Experience had bred no fancies in
him that could raise the phantasm of appetite.
And Raveloe was a village where many of the old echoes
lingered, undrowned by new voices. Not that it was one of
those barren parishes lying on the outskirts of civilization -
inhabited by meagre sheep and thinly-scattered shepherds:
on the contrary, it lay in the rich central plain of what we
are pleased to call Merry England, and held farms which,
speaking from a spiritual point of view, paid highly-desirable
tithes. But it was nestled in a snug well-wooded hollow, quite
an hour's journey on horseback from any turnpike, where it
was never reached by the vibrations of the coach-horn, or of
public opinion. It was an important-looking village, with a
fine old church and large churchyard in the heart of it, and
two or three large brick-and-stone homesteads, with well-walled
orchards and ornamental weathercocks, standing
close upon the road, and lifting more imposing fronts than
the rectory, which peeped from among the trees on the other
side of the churchyard: - a village which showed at once
the summits of its social life, and told the practised eye that
there was no great park and manor-house in the vicinity, but
that there were several chiefs in Raveloe who could farm
badly quite at their ease, drawing enough money from their
bad farming, in those war times, to live in a rollicking
fashion, and keep a jolly Christmas, Whitsun, and Easter
tide.
It was fifteen years since Silas Marner had first come to
Raveloe; he was then simply a pallid young man, with
prominent, short-sighted brown eyes, whose appearance
would have had nothing strange for people of average culture
and experience, but for the villagers near whom he had
come to settle it had mysterious peculiarities which corresponded
with the exceptional nature of his occupation, and
his advent from an unknown region called "North'ard". So
had his way of life: - he invited no comer to step across his
door-sill, and he never strolled into the village to drink a
pint at the Rainbow, or to gossip at the wheelwright's: he
sought no man or woman, save from the purposes of his calling,
or in order to supply himself with necessaries; and it
was soon clear to the Raveloe lasses that he would never
urge one of them to accept him against her will - quite as if
he had heard them declare that they would never marry a
dead man come to life again. This view of Marner's personality
was not without another ground than his pale face
and unexampled eyes; for Jem Rodney, the mole-catcher,
averred that one evening as he was returning homeward he
saw Silas Marner leaning against a stile with a heavy bag
on his back, instead of resting the bag on the stile as a man
in his senses would have done; and that, on coming up to
him, he saw that Marner's eyes were set like a dead man's,
and he spoke to him, and shook him, and his limbs were
stiff, and his hands clutched the bag as if they'd been made
of iron; but just as he had made up his mind that the
weaver was dead, he came all right again, like, as you might
say, in the winking of an eye, and said "Good-night", and
walked off. All this Jem swore he had seen, more by token
that it was the very day he had been mole-catching on Squire
Cass's land, down by the old saw-pit. Some said Marner must
have been in a "fit", a word which seemed to explain things
otherwise incredible; but the argumentative Mr Macey, clerk
of the parish, shook his head, and asked if anybody was ever
known to go off in a fit and not fall down. A fit was a stroke,
wasn't it? and it was in the nature of a stroke to partly take
away the use of a man's limbs and throw him on the parish,
if he'd got no children to look to. No, no; it was no stroke
that would let a man stand on his legs, like a horse between
the shafts, and then walk off as soon as you can say
"Gee!" But there might be such a thing as a man's soul being
loose from his body, and going out and in, like a bird out of
its nest and back; and that was how folks got over-wise, for
they went to school in this shell-less state to those who could
teach them more than their neighbours could learn with
their five senses and the parson. And where did Master
Marner get his knowledge of herbs from - and charms too,
if he liked to give them away? Jem Rodney's story was no
more than what might have been expected by anybody who
had seen how Marner had cured Sally Oates, and made her
sleep like a baby, when her heart had been beating enough
to burst her body, for two months and more, while she had
been under the doctor's care.  He might cure more folks if
he would; but he was worth speaking fair, if it was only to
keep him from doing you a mischief.
It was partly to this vague fear that Marner was indebted
for protecting him from the persecution that his singularities
might have drawn upon him, but still more to the fact
that, the old linen-weaver in the neighbouring parish of
Tarley being dead, his handicraft made him a highly welcome
settler to the richer housewives of the district, and even
to the more provident cottagers, who had their little stock of
yarn at the year's end. Their sense of his usefulness would
have counteracted any repugnance or suspicion which was
not confirmed by a deficiency in the quality or the tale of
the cloth he wove for them. And the years had rolled on
without producing any change in the impressions of the
neighbours concerning Marner, except the change from
novelty to habit. At the end of fifteen years the Raveloe
men said just the same things about Silas Marner as at the
beginning: they did not say them quite so often, but they
believed them much more strongly when they did say them.
There was only one important addition which the years had
brought: it was, that Master Marner had laid by a fine sight
of money somewhere, and that he could buy up "bigger men"
than himself.
But while opinion concerning him had remained nearly
stationary, and his daily habits had presented scarcely any
visible change, Marner's inward life had been a history and
a metamorphosis, as that of every fervid nature must be
when it has fled, or been condemned to solitude. His life,
before he came to Raveloe, had been filled with the movement,
the mental activity, and the close fellowship, which,
in that day as in this, marked the life of an artisan early
incorporated
in a narrow religious sect, where the poorest layman
has the chance of distinguishing himself by gifts of
speech, and has, at the very least, the weight of a silent
voter in the government of his community. Marner was
highly thought of in that little hidden world, known to
itself as the church assembling in Lantern Yard; he was
believed to be a young man of exemplary life and ardent
faith; and a peculiar interest had been centred in him ever
since he had fallen, at a prayer-meeting, into a mysterious
rigidity and suspension of consciousness, which, lasting for
an hour or more, had been mistaken for death. To have
sought a medical explanation for this phenomenon would
have been held by Silas himself, as well as by his minister
and fellow-members, a wilful self-exclusion from the spiritual
significance that might lie therein. Silas was evidently a
brother selected for a peculiar discipline, and though the
effort to interpret this discipline was discouraged by the absence,
on his part, of any spiritual vision during his outward
trance, yet it was believed by himself and others that its
effect was seen in an accession of light and fervour. A less
truthful man than he might have been tempted into the
subsequent creation of a vision in the form of resurgent
memory; a less sane man might have believed in such a
creation; but Silas was both sane and honest, though, as with
many honest and fervent men, culture had not defined any
channels for his sense of mystery, and so it spread itself over
the proper pathway of inquiry and knowledge. He had inherited
from his mother some acquaintance with medicinal
herbs and their preparation - a little store of wisdom which
she had imparted to him as a solemn bequest - but of late
years he had doubts about the lawfulness of applying
this knowledge, believing that herbs could have no efficacy
without prayer, and that prayer might suffice without herbs;
so that his inherited delight to wander through the fields in
search of foxglove and dandelion and coltsfoot, began to
wear to him the character of a temptation.
Among the members of his church there was one young
man, a little older than himself, with whom he had long
lived in such close friendship that it was the custom of their
Lantern Yard brethren to call them David and Jonathan.
The real name of the friend was William Dane, and he
too was regarded as a shining instance of youthful piety,
though somewhat given to over-severity towards weaker
brethren, and to be so dazzled by his own light as to hold
himself wiser than his teachers. But whatever blemishes
others might discern in William, to his friend's mind he was
faultless; for Marner had one of those impressible self doubting
natures which, at an inexperienced age, admire
imperativeness and lean on contradiction. The expression of
trusting simplicity in Marner's face, heightened by that
absence of special observation, that defenceless, deer-like
gaze which belongs to large prominent eyes, was strongly
contrasted by the self-complacent suppression of inward
triumph that lurked in the narrow slanting eyes and compressed
lips of William Dane. One of the most frequent
topics of conversation between the two friends was Assurance
of salvation: Silas confessed that he could never
arrive at anything higher than hope mingled with fear, and
listened with longing wonder when William declared that
he had possessed unshaken assurance ever since, in the period
of his conversion, he had dreamed that he saw the words
"calling and election sure" standing by themselves on a
white page in the open Bible. Such colloquies have occupied
many a pair of pale-faced weavers, whose unnurtured souls
have been like young winged things, fluttering forsaken in
the twilight.
It had seemed to the unsuspecting Silas that the friendship
had suffered no chill even from his formation of another
attachment of a closer kind. For some months he had been
engaged to a young servant-woman, waiting only for a little
increase to their mutual savings in order to their marriage;
and it was a great delight to him that Sarah did not object
to William's occasional presence in their Sunday interviews.
It was at this point in their history that Silas's cataleptic fit
occurred during the prayer-meeting; and amidst the various
queries and expressions of interest addressed to him by his
fellow-members, William's suggestion alone jarred with the
general sympathy towards a brother thus singled out for
special dealings. He observed that, to him, this trance looked
more like a visitation of Satan than a proof of divine favour,
and exhorted his friend to see that he hid no accursed thing
within his soul. Silas, feeling bound to accept rebuke and
admonition as a brotherly office, felt no resentment, but
only pain, at his friend's doubts concerning him; and to this
was soon added some anxiety at the perception that Sarah's
manner towards him began to exhibit a strange fluctuation
between an effort at an increased manifestation of regard
and involuntary signs of shrinking and dislike. He asked her
if she wished to break off their engagement; but she denied
this: their engagement was known to the church, and had
been recognized in the prayer-meetings; it could not be
broken off without strict investigation, and Sarah could
render no reason that would be sanctioned by the feeling
of the community. At this time the senior deacon was taken
dangerously ill, and, being a childless widower, he was
tended night and day by some of the younger brethren or
sisters. Silas frequently took his turn in the night-watching
with William, the one relieving the other at two in the
morning. The old man, contrary to expectation, seemed to
be on the way to recovery, when one night Silas, setting up
by his bedside, observed that his usual audible breathing had
ceased. The candle was burning low, and he had to lift it to
see the patient's face distinctly. Examination convinced him
that the deacon was dead - had been dead for some time,
for the limbs were rigid. Silas asked himself if he had been
asleep, and looked at the clock: it was already four in the
morning. How was it that William had not come? In much
anxiety he went to seek for help, and soon there were several
friends assembled in the house, the minister among them,
while Silas went away to his work, wishing he could have
met William to know the reason of his non-appearance. But
at six o'clock, as he was thinking of going to seek his friend,
William came, and with him the minister. They came to
summon him to Lantern Yard, to meet the church members
there; and to his inquiry concerning the cause of the summons
the only reply was, "You will hear." Nothing further
was said until Silas was seated in the vestry, in front of the
minister, with the eyes of those who to him represented
God's people fixed solemnly upon him. Then the minister,
taking out a pocket-knife, showed it to Silas, and asked him
if he knew where he had left that knife? Silas said, he did
not know that he had left it anywhere out of his own pocket
- but he was trembling at this strange interrogation. He
was then exhorted not to hide his sin, but to confess and
repent. The knife had been found in the bureau by the departed
deacon's bedside - found in the place where the little
bag of church money had lain, which the minister himself
had seen the day before. Some hand had removed that bag;
and whose hand could it be, if not that of the man to whom
the knife belonged? For some time Silas was mute with
astonishment: then he said, "God will clear me: I know
nothing about the knife being there, or the money being
gone. Search me and my dwelling; you will find nothing
but three pound five of my own savings, which William
Dane knows I have had these six months." At this William
groaned, but the minister said, "The proof is heavy against
you, brother Marner. The money was taken in the night
last past, and no man was with out departed brother but you,
for William Dane declares to us that he was hindered by
sudden sickness from going to take his place as usual, and
you yourself said that he had not come; and, moreover, you
neglected the dead body."
"I must have slept," said Silas. Then, after a pause, he
added, "Or I must have had another visitation like that
which you have all seen me under, so that the thief must
have come and gone while I was not in the body, but out of
the body. But, I say again, search me and my dwelling, for I
have been nowhere else."
The search was made, and it ended - in William Dane's
finding the well-known bag, empty, tucked behind the chest
of drawers in Silas's chamber! On this William exhorted his
friend to confess, and not to hide his sin any longer. Silas
turned a look of keen reproach on him, and said, "William,
for nine years that we have gone in and out together, have
you ever known me tell a lie? But God will clear me."
"Brother," said William, "how do I know what you may
have done in the secret chambers of your heart, to give Satan
an advantage over you?"
Silas was still looking at his friend. Suddenly a deep flush
came over his face, and he was about to speak impetuously,
when he seemed checked again by some inward shock, that
sent the flush back and made him tremble. But at last he
spoke feebly, looking at William.
"I remember now - the knife wasn't in my pocket."
William said, "I know nothing of what you mean." The
other persons present, however, began to inquire where Silas
meant to say that the knife was, but he would give no
further explanation: he only said, "I am sore stricken; I can
say nothing. God will clear me."
On their return to the vestry there was further deliberating
Any resort to legal measures for ascertaining the culprit
was contrary to the principles of the church in Lantern
Yard, according to which prosecution was forbidden to
Christians, even had the case held less scandal to the
community. But the members were bound to take other
measures for finding out the truth, and they resolved on
praying and drawing lots. This resolution can be a ground of
surprise only to those who are unacquainted with that
obscure religious life which has gone on in the alleys of our
towns. Silas knelt with his brethren, relying on his own
innocence being certified by immediate divine interference,
but feeling that there was sorrow and mourning behind for
him even then - that his trust in man had been cruelly
bruised.
The lots declared that Silas Marner was guilty.
He
was solemnly suspended from church-membership, and
called upon to render up the stolen money: only on confession,
as the sign of repentance, could he be received once
more within the fold of the church. Marner listened in
silence. At last, when every one rose to depart, he went
towards William Dane and said, in a voice shaken by
agitation -
"The last time I remember using my knife, was when I
took it out to cut a strap for you. I don't remember putting it
in my pocket again.
You
stole the money, and you have
woven a plot to lay the sin at my door. But you may prosper,
for all that: there is no just God that governs the earth
righteously, but a God of lies, that bears witness against the
innocent."
There was a general shudder at this blasphemy.
William said meekly, "I leave our brethren to judge
whether this is the voice of Satan or not. I can do nothing
but pray for you, Silas."
Poor Marner went out with that despair in his soul - that
shaken trust in God and man, which is little short of madness
to a loving nature. In the bitterness of his wounded
spirit, he said to himself, "
She
will cast me
off too." And he
reflected that, if she did not believe the testimony against
him, her whole faith must be upset as his was. To people
accustomed to reason about the forms in which their religious
feeling has incorporated itself, it is difficult to enter
into that simple, untaught state of mind in which the form
and the feeling have never been severed by an act of
reflection. We are apt to think it inevitable that a an in
Marner's position should have begun to question the validity
of an appeal to the divine judgment by drawing lots; but to
him this would have been an effort of independent thought
such as he had never known; and he must have made the
effort at a moment when all his energies were turned into
the anguish of disappointed faith. If there is an angel who
records the sorrows of men as well as their sins, he knows
how many and deep are the sorrows that spring from false
ideas for which no man is culpable.
Marner went home, and for a whole day sat alone, stunned
by despair, without any impulse to go to Sarah and attempt
to win her belief in his innocence. The second day he took
refuge from benumbing unbelief, by getting into his loom
and working away as usual; and before many hours were
past, the minister and one of the deacons came to him with
the message from Sarah, that she held her engagement to
him at an end. Silas received the message mutely, and then
turned away from the messengers to work at his loom again.
In little more than a month from that time, Sarah was
married to William Dane; and not long afterwards it was
known to the brethren in Lantern Yard that Silas Marner
had departed from the town.
Even people whose lives have been made various by learning,
sometimes find it hard to keep a fast hold on their
habitual views of life, on their faith in the Invisible, nay, on
the sense that their past joys and sorrows are a real experience,
when they are suddenly transported to a new land,
where the beings around them know nothing of their history,
and share none of their ideas - where their mother
earth shows another lap, and human life has other forms
than those on which their souls have been nourished. Minds
that have been unhinged from their old faith and love, have
perhaps sought this Lethean influence of exile, in which the
past becomes dreamy because its symbols have all vanished,
and the present too is dreamy because it is linked with
no memories. But even
their
experience may hardly
enable
them thoroughly to imagine what was the effect on a simple
weaver like Silas Marner, when he left his own country and
people and came to settle in Raveloe. Nothing could be
more unlike his native town, set within sight of the widespread
hillsides, than this low, wooded region, where he felt
hidden even from the heavens by the screening trees and
hedgerows. There was nothing here, when he rose in the
deep morning quiet and looked out on the dewy brambles
and rank tufted grass, that seemed to have any relation with
that life centring in Lantern Yard, which had once been to
him the altar-place of high dispensations. The white-washed
walls; the little pews where well-known figures entered with
a subdued rustling, and where first one well-known voice
and then another, pitched in a peculiar key of petition, uttered
phrases at once occult and familiar, like the amulet
worn on the heart; the pulpit where the minister delivered
unquestioned doctrine, and swayed to and fro, and handled
the book in a long-accustomed manner; the very pauses between
the couplets of the hymn, as it was given out, and the
recurrent swell of voices in song: these things had been the
channel of divine influences to Marner - they were
Christianity
and God's kingdom upon earth. A weaver who finds
hard words in his hymn-book knows nothing of abstractions;
as the little child knows nothing of parental love, but
only knows one face and one lap towards which it stretches
its arms for refuge and nurture.
And what could be more unlike that Lantern Yard world
than the world in Raveloe? - orchards looking lazy with
neglected plenty; the large church in the wide churchyard,
which men gazed at lounging at their own doors in service-time;
the purple-faced farmers jogging along the lanes or
turning in at the Rainbow; homesteads, where men supped
heavily and slept in the light of the evening hearth, and
where women seemed to be laying up a stock of linen for the
life to come. There were no lips in Raveloe from which a
word could fall that would stir Silas Marner's benumbed
faith to a sense of pain. In the early ages of the world, we
know, it was believed that each territory was inhabited and
ruled by its own divinities, so that a man could cross the
bordering heights and be out of the reach of his native gods,
whose presence was confined to the streams and the groves
and the hills among which he had lived from his birth. And
poor Silas was vaguely conscious of something not unlike
the feeling of primitive men, when they fled thus, in fear or
in sullenness, from the face of an unpropitious deity. It
seemed to him that the Power he had vainly trusted in
among the streets and at the prayer-meetings, was very far
away from this land in which he had taken refuge, where
men lived in careless abundance, knowing and needing
nothing of that trust, which, for him, had been turned to
bitterness. The little light he possessed spread its beams so
narrowly, that frustrated belief was a curtain broad enough
to create for him the blackness of night.
His first movement after the shock had been to work in
his loom; and he went on with this unremittingly, never
asking himself why, now he was come to Raveloe, he worked
far on into the night to finish the tale of Mrs Osgood's
table-linen sooner than she expected - without contemplating
beforehand the money she would put into his hand for the
work. He seemed to weave, like the spider, from pure impulse,
without reflection. Every man's work, pursued steadily,
tends in this way to become an end in itself, and so to bridge
over the loveless chasms of his life. Silas's hand satisfied
itself with throwing the shuttle, and his eye with seeing the
little squares in the cloth complete themselves under his
effort. Then there were the calls of hunger; and Silas, in his
solitude, had to provide his own breakfast, dinner, and supper,
to fetch his own water from the well, and put his own
kettle on the fire; and all these immediate promptings
helped, along with the weaving, to reduce his life to the
unquestioning activity of a spinning insect. He hated the
thought of the past; there was nothing that called out his
love and fellowship toward the strangers he had come
amongst; and the future was all dark, for there was no Unseen
Love that cared for him. Thought was arrested by
utter bewilderment, now its old narrow pathway was closed,
and affection seemed to have died under the bruise that had
fallen on its keenest nerves.
But at last Mrs Osgood's table-linen was finished, and
Silas was paid in gold. His earnings in his native town, where
he worked for a wholesale dealer, had been after a lower
rate; he had been paid weekly, and of his weekly earnings a
large proportion had gone to objects of piety and charity.
Now, for the first time in his life, he had five bright guineas
put into his hand; no man expected a share of them, and he
loved no man that he should offer him a share. But what
were the guineas to him who saw no vista beyond countless
days of weaving? It was needless for him to ask that, for it
was pleasant to him to feel them in his palm, and look at
their bright faces, which were all his own: it was another
element of life, like the weaving and the satisfaction of
hunger, subsisting quite aloof from the life of belief and love
from which he had been cut off. The weaver's hand had
known the touch of hard-won money even before the palm
had grown to its full breadth; for twenty years, mysterious
money had stood to him as the symbol of earthly good, and
the immediate object of toil. He had seemed to love it little
in the years when every penny had its purpose for him; for
he loved the
purpose
then. But now, when all purpose
was
gone, that habit of looking towards the money and grasping
it with a sense of fulfilled effort made a loam that was deep
enough for the seeds of desire; and as Silas walked homeward
across the fields in the twilight, he drew out the money
and thought it was brighter in the gathering gloom.
About this time an incident happened which seemed to
open a possibility of some fellowship with his neighbours.
One day, taking a pair of shoes to be mended, he saw the
cobbler's wife seated by the fire, suffering from the terrible
symptoms of heart-disease and dropsy, which he had witnessed
as the precursors or his mother's death. He felt a rush
of pity at the mingled sight and remembrance, and, recalling
the relief his mother had found from a simple preparation
of foxglove, he promised Sally Oates to bring her something
that would ease her, since the doctor did her no good.
In this office of charity, Silas felt, for the first time since he
had come to Raveloe, a sense of unity between his past present
life, which might have been the beginning of his
rescue from the insect-like existence into which his nature
had shrunk. But Sally Oates's disease had raised her into a
personage of much interest and importance among the
neighbours, and the fact of her having found relief from
drinking Silas Marner's "stuff" became a matter of general
discourse. When Doctor Kimble gave physic, it was natural
that it should have an effect; but when a weaver, who came
from nobody knew where, worked wonders with a bottle of
brown waters, the occult character of the process was evident.
Such a short of thing had not been known since the
Wise Woman at Tarley died; and she had charms as well as
"stuff": everybody went to her when their children had fits.
Silas Marner must be a person of the same sort, for how die
he know what would bring back Sally Oate's breath, if he
didn't know a fine sight more than that? The Wise Woman
had words that she muttered to herself, so that you couldn't
hear what they were, and if she tied a bit of red thread
round the child's toe the while, it would keep off the water
in the head. There were women in Raveloe, at that present
time, who had worn one of the Wise Woman's little bags
round their necks, and, in consequence, had never had an
idiot child, as Ann Coulter had. Silas Marner could very
likely do as much, and more; and now it was all clear how
he should have come from unknown parts, and be so
"comical-looking". But Sally Oates must mind and not tell
the doctor, for he would be sure to set his face against Marner:
he was always angry about the Wise Woman, and used
to threaten those who went to her that they should have
none of his help any more.
Silas now found himself and his cottage suddenly beset by
mothers who wanted him to charm away the whooping-cough, or
bring back the milk, and by men who wanted stuff
against the rheumatics or the knots in the hands; and, to
secure themselves against a refusal, the applicants brought
silver in their palms. Silas might have driven a profitable
trade in charms as well as in his small list of drugs; but
money on this condition was no temptation to him: he had
never known an impulse towards falsity, and he drove one
after another away with growing irritation, for the news of
him as a wise man had spread even to Tarley, and it was
long before people ceased to take long walks for the sake of
asking his aid. But the hope in his wisdom was at length
changed into dread, for no one believed him when he said
he knew no charms and could work no cures, and every man
and woman who had an accident or a new attack after
applying to him, set the misfortune down to Master Marner's
ill-will and irritated glances. Thus it came to pass that
his movement of pity towards Sally Oates, which had given
him a transient sense of brotherhood, heightened the repulsion
between him and his neighbours, and made his isolation
more complete.
Gradually the guineas, the crowns, and the half-crowns,
grew to a heap, and Marner drew less and less for his own
wants, trying to solve the problem of keeping himself strong
enough to work sixteen hours a-day on as small an outlay as
possible. Have not men, shut up in solitary imprisonment,
found an interest in marking the moments by straight
strokes of a certain length on the wall, until the growth of
the sum of straight strokes, arranged in triangles, has become
a mastering purpose? Do we not wile away moments of
inanity or fatigued waiting by repeating some trivial movement
or sound, until the repetition has bred a want, which
in incipient habit? That will help us to understand how the
love of accumulating money grows an absorbing passion in
men whose imaginations, even in the very beginning of their
hoard, showed them no purpose beyond it. Marner wanted
the heaps to ten to grow into a square, and then into a larger
square; and every added guinea, while it was itself a satisfaction,
bred a new desire. In this strange world, made a hopeless
riddle to him, he might, if he had a less intense
nature, have sat weaving, weaving - looking towards the end
of his pattern, or towards the end of his web, till he forgot
the riddle, and everything else but his immediate sensations;
but the money had come to mark off his weaving into
periods, and the money not only grew, but it remained with
him. He began to think it was conscious of him, as his loom
was, and he would on no account have exchanged those
coins, which had become his familiars, for other coins with
unknown faces. He handled them, he counted them, till
their form and colour were like the satisfaction of a thirst
to him; but it was only in the night, when his work was done,
that he drew them out to enjoy their companionship. He
had taken up some bricks in his floor underneath his loom,
and here he had made a hole in which he set the iron pot
that contained his guineas and silver coins, covering the
bricks with sand whenever he replaced them. Not that the
idea of being robbed presented itself often or strongly to his
mind: hoarding was common in country districts i those
days; there were old labourers in the parish of Raveloe who
were known to have their savings by them, probably inside
their flock-beds; but their rustic neighbours, though not all
of them as honest as their ancestors in the days of King
Alfred, had not imaginations bold enough to lay a plan of
burglary. How could they have spent the money in their
own village without betraying themselves? They would be
obliged to "run away" - a course as dark and dubious as a
balloon journey.
So, year after year, Silas Marner had lived in this solitude,
his guineas rising in the iron pot, and his life narrowing and
hardening itself more and more into a mere pulsation of
desire and satisfaction that had no relation to any other
being. His life had reduced itself to the functions of weaving
and hoarding, without any contemplation of an end towards
which the functions tended. The same sort of process has
perhaps been undergone by wiser men, when they have been
cut off from faith and love - only, instead of a loom and a
heap of guineas, they have had some erudite research, some
ingenious project, or some well-knit theory. Strangely Marner's
face and figure shrank and bent themselves in to constant
mechanical relation to the objects of his life, so that he
produced the same sort of impression as a handle or a
crooked tube, which has no meaning standing apart. The
prominent eyes that used to look trusting and dreamy, now
looked as if they had been made to see only one kind of
thing that was very small, like tiny grain, for which they
hunted everywhere: and he was so withered and yellow,
that, though he was not yet forty, the children always called
him "Old Master Marner".
Yet even in this stage of withering a little incident happened,
which showed that the sap of affection was not all
gone. It was one of his daily tasks to fetch his water from a
well a couple of fields off, and for this purpose, ever since he
came to Raveloe, he had had a brown earthenware pot,
which he held as his most precious utensil among the very
few conveniences he had granted himself. It had been his
companion for twelve years, always standing on the same
spot, always lending its handle to him in the early morning,
so that its form had an expression for him of willing helpfulness,
and the impress of its handle on his palm gave a satisfaction
mingled with that of having the fresh clear water.
One day as he was returning from the well, he stumbled
against the step of the stile, and his brown pot, falling with
force against the stones that overarched the ditch below
him, was broken in three pieces. Silas picked up the pieces
and carried them home with grief in his heart. The brown
pot could never be of use to him any more, but he stuck the
bits together and propped the ruin in its old place for a
memorial.
This is the history of Silas Marner until the fifteenth year
after he came to Raveloe. The livelong day he sat in his
loom, his ear filled with its monotony, his eyes bent close
down on the slow growth of sameness in the brownish web,
his muscles moving with such even repetition that their
pause seemed almost as much a constraint as the holding of
his breath. But at night came his revelry: at night he closed
his shutters, and made fast his doors, and drew forth his
gold. Long ago the heap of coins had become too large for
the iron pot to hold them, and he had made for them two
thick leather bags, which wasted no room in their resting
place, but lent themselves flexibly to every corner. How the
guineas shone as they came pouring out of the dark leather
mouths! The silver bore no large proportion in amount to
the gold, because the long pieces of linen which formed his
chief work were always partly paid for in gold, and out of
the silver he supplied his own bodily wants, choosing always
the shillings and sixpences to spend in this way. He loved
the guineas best, but he would not change the silver - the
crowns and half-crowns that were his own earnings, begotten
by his labour; he loved them all. He spread them out in
heaps and bathed his hands in them; then he counted them
and set them up in regular piles, and felt their rounded outline
between his thumb and fingers, and thought fondly of
the guineas that were only half-earned by the work in his
loom, as if they had been unborn children - thought of the
guineas that were coming slowly through the coming years,
through all his life, which spread far away before him, the
end quite hidden by countless days of weaving. No wonder
his thoughts were still with his loom and his money when he
made his journeys through the fields and the lanes to fetch
and carry home his work, so that his steps never wandered
to the hedge-banks and the lane-side in search of the once
familiar herbs; these too belonged to the past, from which
his life had shrunk away, like a rivulet that has sunk far
down from the grassy fringe of its old breadth into a little
shivering thread, that cuts a groove for itself in the barren
sand.
But about the Christmas of that fifteenth year, a second
great change came over Marner's life, and his history became
blent in a singular manner with the life of his neighbours.
The greatest man in Raveloe was Squire Cass, who lived in
the large red house with the handsome flight of stone steps
in front and the high stables behind it, nearly opposite the
church. He was only one among several landed parishioners,
but he along was honoured with the title of Squire; for
though Mr Osgood's family was also understood to be of
timeless origin - still, he merely owned the farm he occupied;
whereas Squire Cass had a tenant or two, who complained of
the game to him quite as if he had been a lord.
It was still that glorious war-time which was felt to be a
peculiar favour of Providence towards the landed interest,
and the fall of prices had not yet come to carry the race of
small squires and yeomen down that road to ruin for which
extravagant habits and bad husbandry were plentifully
anointing their wheels. I am speaking now in relation to
Raveloe and the parishes that resembled it; for our old-fashioned
country life had many different aspects, as all life
must have when it is spread over a various surface, and
breathed on variously by multitudinous currents from the
winds of heaven to the thoughts of men, which are for ever
moving and crossing each other with incalculable results.
Raveloe lay low among the bushy trees and the rutted lanes,
aloof from the currents of industrial energy and Puritan
earnestness: the rich ate and drank freely, accepting gout
and apoplexy as things that ran mysteriously in respectable
families, and the poor thought that the rich were entirely in
the right of it to lead a jolly life; besides, their feasting
caused a multiplication of orts, which were the heirlooms of
the poor.  Betty Jay scented the boiling of Squire Cass's
hams, but her longing was arrested by the unctuous liquor in
which they were boiled; and when the seasons brought
round the great merry-makings, they were regarded on all
hands as a fine thing for the poor. For the Raveloe feasts
were like the rounds of beef and the barrels of ale - they
were on a large scale, and lasted a good while, especially in
the winter-time. After ladies had packed up their best gowns
and top-knots in bandboxes, and had incurred the risk of
fording streams on pillions with the precious burden in rainy
or snowy weather, when there was no knowing how high the
water would rise, it was not to be supposed that they looked
forward to a brief pleasure. On this ground it was always
contrived in the dark seasons, when there was little work to
be done, and the hours were long, that several neighbours
should keep open house in succession. So soon as Squire
Cass's standing dishes diminished in plenty and freshness,
his guests had nothing to do but walk a little higher up
the village to Mr Osgood's, at the Orchards, and they found
hams and chines uncut, pork-pies with the scent of the fire
in them, spun butter in all its freshness - everything, in
fact, that appetites at leisure could desire, in perhaps greater
perfection, though not in greater abundance, than at Squire
Cass's.
For the Squire's wife had died long ago, and the Red
House was without that presence of the wife and mother
which is the fountain of wholesome love and fear in parlour
and kitchen; and this helped to account not only for there
being more profusion than finished excellence in the holiday
provisions, but also for the frequency with which the
proud Squire condescended to preside in the parlour or the
Rainbow rather than under the shadow of his own dark
wainscot; perhaps, also, for the fact that his sons had turned
out rather ill. Raveloe was not a place where moral censure
was severe, but it was thought a weakness in the Squire that
he had kept all his sons at home in idleness; and though
some licence was to be allowed to young men whose fathers
could afford it, people shook their heads at the courses of the
second son, Dunstan, commonly called Dunsey Cass, whose
taste for swopping and betting might turn out to be a sowing
of something worse than wild oats. To be sure, the
neighbours said, it was no matter what became of Dunsey -
a spiteful jeering fellow, who seemed to enjoy his drink the
more when other people went dry - always provided that his
doings did not brink trouble on a family like Squire Cass's,
with a monument in the church and tankards older than
King George. But it would be a thousand pities if Mr Godfrey,
the eldest, a fine open-faced good-natured young man
who was to come into the land some day, should take to
going along the same road with his brother, as he had
seemed to do of late. If he went on in that way, he would
lose Miss Nancy Lammeter; for it was well known that she
had looked very shyly on him ever since last Whitsuntide
twelvemonth,when there was so much talk about his being
away from home days and days together. There was something
wrong, more than common - that was quite clear; for
Mr Godfrey didn't look half so fresh-coloured and open as
he used to. At one time everybody was saying, What a
handsome couple he and Miss Nancy Lammeter would
make! and if she could come to be mistress at the Red
House, there would be a fine change, for the Lammeters had
been brought up in that way, that they never suffered a
pinch of salt to be wasted, and yet everybody in their household
had of the best, according to his place. Such a daughter-in-law
would be a saving to the old Squire, if she never
brought a penny to her fortune; for it was to be feared that,
notwithstanding his incomings, there were more holes in his
pocket than the one where he put his own hand in. But if
Mr Godfrey didn't turn over a new leaf, he might say
"Good-bye" to Miss Nancy Lammeter.
It was the once hopeful Godfrey who was standing, with
his hands in his side-pockets and his back to the fire, in the
dark wainscoted parlour, one late November afternoon in
that fifteenth year of Silas Marner's life at Raveloe. The
fading grey light fell dimly on the walls decorated with
guns, ships, and foxes' brushes, on coats and hats flung on
the chairs, on tankards sending forth a scent of flat ale, and
on a half-choked fire, with pipes propped up in the
chimney-corners: signs of a domestic life destitute of any
hallowing charm, with which the look of gloomy vexation
on Godfrey's blond face was in sad accordance. He seemed
to be waiting and listening for some one's approach, and
presently the sound of a heavy step, with an accompanying
whistle, was heard across the large empty entrance-hall.
The door opened, and a thick-set, heavy-looking young
man entered, with the flushed face and the gratuitously
elated bearing which mark the first of intoxication. It
was Dunsey, and at the sight of him Godfrey's face parted
with some of its gloom to take on the more active expression
of hatred. The handsome brown spaniel that lay on the
hearth retreated under the chair in the chimney-corner.
"Well, Master Godfrey, what do you want with me?" said
Dunsey, in a mocking tone. "You're my elders and betters,
you know; I was obliged to come when you sent for me."
"Why, this is what I want - and just shake yourself sober
and listen, will you?" said Godfrey, savagely. He had himself
been drinking more than was good for him, trying to turn
his gloom into uncalculating anger. "I want to tell you, I
must hand over that rent of Fowler's to the Squire, or else tell
him I gave it you; for he's threatening to distrain for it,
and it'll all be out soon, whether I tell him or not. He said,
just now, before he went out, he should send word to Cox to
distrain, if Fowler didn't come and pay up his arrears this
weak. The Squire's short o' cash, and in no humour to stand
any nonsense; and you know what he threatened,
found you making away with his money again. So, see and
get the money, and pretty quickly, will you?"
"Oh!" said Dunsey, sneeringly, coming nearer to his
brother and looking in his face. "Suppose, now, you get the
money yourself, and save me the trouble, eh? Since you was
so kind as to hand over to me, you'll not refuse me the
kindness to pay it back for me: it was your brotherly love
made you do it, you know."
Godfrey bit his lips and clenched his fist. "Don't come
near me with that look, else I'll knock you down."
"O no, you won't," said Dunsey, turning away on his heel,
however. "Because I'm such a good-natured brother, you
know. I might get you turned out of house and home, and
cut off with a shilling any day. I might tell the Squire how
his handsome son was married to that nice young woman,
Molly Farren, and was very unhappy because he couldn't
live with his drunken wife, and I should slip into your place
as comfortable as could be. But you see, I don't do it - I'm
so easy and good-natured. You'll take any trouble for
me. You'll get the hundred pounds for me - I know you
will."
"How can I get the money?" said Godfrey, quivering. "I
haven't a shilling to bless myself with. And it's a lie that
you'd slip into my place: you'd get yourself turned out too,
that's all. For if you begin telling tales, I'll follow. Bob's my
father's favourite - you know that very well. He'd only think
himself well rid of you."
"Never mind," said Dunsey, nodding his head sideways as
he looked out of the window. "It 'ud be very pleasant to me
to go in your company - you're such a handsome brother,
and we've always been fond of quarrelling with one another,
I shouldn't know what to do without you. But you'd
like better for us both to stay at home together; I know you
would. So you'll manage to get that little sum o' money, and
I'll bid you good-bye, though I'm sorry to part."
Dunstan was moving off, but Godfrey rushed after him
and seized him by the arm, saying, with an oath,
"I tell you, I have no money: I can get no money."
"Borrow of old Kimble."
"I tell you, he won't lend me any more, and I shan't ask
him."
"Well, then, sell Wildfire."
"Yes, that's easy talking. I must have the money directly."
"Well, you've only got to ride him to the hunt to-morrow.
There'll be Bryce and Keating there, for sure. You'll get
more bids than one."
"I daresay, and get back home at eight o'clock, splashed
up to the chin. I'm going to Mrs Osgood's birthday dance."
"Oho!" said Dunsey, turning his head on one side, and trying
to speak in a small mincing treble. "And there's sweet
Miss Nancy coming; and we shall dance with her, and
promise never to be naughty again, and be taken into
favour, and -"
"Hold your tongue about Miss Nancy, you fool," said Godfrey,
turning red, "else I'll throttle you."
"What for?" said Dunsey, still in an artificial tone, but
taking a whip from the table and beating the butt-end of it
on his palm. "You've a very good chance. I'll advise you to
creep up her sleeve again: it 'ud be saving time,if Molly
should happen to take a drop too much laudanum some day,
and make a widower of you. Miss Nancy wouldn't mind
being a second, if she didn't know it. And you've got a good-natured
brother, who'll keep your secret well, because you'll
be so very obliging to him."
"I'll tell you what it is," said Godfrey, quivering, and pale
again. "My patience is pretty near at an end. If you'd a little
more sharpness in you, you might know  that you may urge
a man a bit too far, and make one leap as easy as another.
I don't know but what it is so now: I may as well tell the
Squire everything myself - I should get you off my back, if
I got nothing else. And, after all, he'll know some time.
She's been threatening to come herself and tell him. So,
don't flatter yourself that your secrecy's worth any price you
choose to ask. You drain me of money till I have got nothing
to pacify
her
with, and she'll do as she threatens some
day. It's all one. I'll tell my father everything myself, and
you may go to the devil."
Dunsey perceived that he had overshot his mark, and that
there was a point at which even the hesitating Godfrey
might be driven into decision. But he said, with an air of
unconcern,
"As you please; but I'll have a draught of ale first." And
ringing the bell, he threw himself across two chairs, and
began to rap the window-seat with the handle of his
whip.
Godfrey stood, still with his back to the fire, uneasily
moving his fingers among the contents of his side-pockets,
and looking at the floor. That big muscular frame of his
held plenty of animal courage, but helped him to no
decision when the dangers to be braved were such as could
neither be knocked down nor throttled. His natural irresolution
and moral cowardice were exaggerated by a position
in which dreaded consequences seemed to press equally on
all sides, and his irritation had no sooner provoked him to
defy Dunstan and anticipate all possible betrayals, than the
miseries he must bring on himself by such a step seemed
more unendurable to him than the present evil. The results
of confession were not contingent, they were certain; whereas
betrayal was not certain. From the near vision of that
certainty he fell back on suspense and vacillation with a
sense of repose. The disinherited son of a small squire,
equally disinclined to dig and to beg, was almost as helpless
as an uprooted tree, which, by the favour of earth and
sky, has grown to a handsome bulk on the spot where it first
shot upward. Perhaps it would have been possible to think
of digging with some cheerfulness if Nancy Lammeter
were to be won on those terms; but, since he must irrevocably
lose
her
as well as the inheritance, and must break
every tie but the one that degraded him and left him without
motive for trying to recover his better self, he could
imagine no future for himself on the other side of confession
but that of "listing for a soldier" - the most desperate
step, short of suicide, in the eyes of respectable families.
No! he would rather trust to casualties than to his own
resolve - rather go on sitting at the feast and sipping the
wine he loved, though with the sword hanging over him and
terror in his heart, than rush away into the cold darkness
where there was no pleasure left. The utmost concession to
Dunstan about the horse began to seem easy, compared with
the fulfilment of his own threat. But his pride would not let
him recommence the conversation otherwise than by continuing
the quarrel. Dunstan was waiting for this, and took
his ale in shorter draughts than usual.
"It's just like you," Godfrey burst out, in a bitter tone, "to
talk about my selling Wildfire in that cool way - the last
thing I've got to call my own, and the best bit of horse-flesh
I ever had in my life. And if you'd got a spark of pride in
you, you'd be ashamed to see the stables emptied, and everybody
sneering about it. But it's my belief you'd sell yourself,
if it was only for the pleasure of making somebody feel he'd
got a bad bargain."
"Ay, ay," said Dunstan, very placably, "you do me justice,
I see. You know I'm a jewel for 'ticing people into bargains.
For which reason I advise you to let
me
sell Wildfire.
I'd ride him to the hunt tomorrow for you, with pleasure. I
shouldn't look so handsome as you in the saddle, but it's the
horse they'll bid for, and not the rider."
"Yes, I daresay - trust my horse to you!"
"As you please," said Dunstan, rapping the window-seat
again with an air of great unconcern. "It's
you
have got to pay Fowler's money; it's none of my business. You received
the money from him when you went to Bramcote, and
you
told the Squire it wasn't paid. I'd nothing to do with that;
you chose to be so obliging as give it me, that was all. If you
don't want to pay the money, let it alone; it's all one to me.
But I was willing to accommodate you by undertaking to
sell the horse, seeing it's not convenient to you to go so far
tomorrow."
Godfrey was silent for some moments. He would have
liked to spring on Dunstan, wrench the whip from his hand,
and flog him to within an inch of his life; and no bodily
fear could have deterred him; but he was mastered by another
sort of fear, which was fed by feelings stronger even
than his resentment. When he spoke again, it was in a
half-conciliatory tone.
"Well, you mean no nonsense about the horse, eh? You'll
sell him all fair, and hand over the money? If you don't, you
know, everything 'll go to smash, for I've got nothing else
to trust to. And you'll have less pleasure in pulling the house
over my head, when your own skull's broken too."
"Ay, ay," said Dunstan, rising, "all right. I thought you'd
come round. I'm the fellow to bring old Bryce up to the
scratch. I'll get you a hundred and twenty for him, if I get
you a penny."
"But it'll perhaps rain cats and dogs tomorrow, as it did
yesterday, and then you can't go." said Godfrey, hardly
knowing whether he wished for that obstacle or not.
"Not
it
," said Dunstan. "I'm always lucky in my
weather.
It might rain if you wanted to go yourself. You never hold
trumps, you know - I always do. You've got the beauty, you
see, and I've got the luck, so you must keep me by you for
your crooked sixpence; you'll
ne
-ver get along without
me."
"Confound you, hold your tongue!" said Godfrey, impetuously.
"And take care to keep sober tomorrow, else you'll get
pitched on your head coming home, and Wildfire might be
the worse for it."
"Make your tender heart easy," said Dunstan, opening the
door. "You never know me see double when I'd got a bargain
to make; it 'ud spoil the fun. Besides, whenever I fall, I'm
warranted to fall on my legs."
With that, Dunstan slammed the door behind him, and
left Godfrey to that bitter rumination on his personal
circumstances which was now unbroken from day to day save
by the excitement of sporting, drinking, card-playing, or the
rarer and less oblivious pleasure of seeing Miss Nancy Lammeter.
The subtle and varied pains springing from the higher
higher sensibility that accompanies higher culture, are perhaps
less pitiable than that dreary absence of impersonal
enjoyment and consolation which leaves ruder minds to the
perpetual urgent companionship of their own griefs and
discontents. The lives of those rural fore-fathers, whom we
are apt to think very prosaic figures - men whose only work
was to ride round their land, getting heavier and heavier in
their saddles, and who passed the rest of their days in the
half-listless gratification of senses dulled by monotony -
had a certain pathos in them nevertheless. Calamities came to
them
too, and their early errors carried hard
consequences:
perhaps the love of some sweet maiden, the image of purity,
order, and calm, had opened their eyes to the vision of a
life in which the days would not seem too long, even without
rioting; but the maiden was lost, and the vision passed
away, and then what was left to them, especially when they
had become too heavy for the hunt, or for carrying a gun
over the furrows, but to drink and get merry, or to drink
and get angry, so that they might be independent of variety,
and say over again with eager emphasis the things they had
said already any time that twelvemonth? Assuredly, among
these flushed and dull-eyed men there were some whom -
thanks to their native human-kindness - even riot could
never drive into brutality; men who, when their cheeks were
fresh, had felt the keen point of sorrow or remorse, had
been pierced by the reeds they leaned on, or had lightly
put their limbs in fetters from which no struggle could
loose them; and under these sad circumstances, common to
us all, their thoughts could find no resting-place outside the
ever-trodden round of their own petty history.
That, at least, was the condition of Godfrey Cass in this
six-and-twentieth year of his life. A movement of compunction,
helped by those small indefinable influences which
every personal relation exerts on a pliant nature, had urged
him into a secret marriage, which was a blight on his life.
It was an ugly story of low passion, delusion, and waking
from delusion, which needs not to be dragged from the
privacy of Godfrey's bitter memory. He had long known
that the delusion was partly due to a trap laid for him by
Dunstan, who saw in his brother's degrading marriage the
means of gratifying at once his jealous hate and his cupidity
And if Godfrey could have felt himself simply a victim,
the iron bit that destiny had put into his mouth would
have chafed him less intolerably. If the curses he muttered
half aloud when he was alone had had no other  object than
Dunstan's diabolical cunning, he might have shrunk less
from the consequences of avowal. But he had something else
to curse - his own vicious folly, which now seemed as mad
and unaccountable to him as almost all our follies and vices
do when their promptings have long passed away. For four
years he had thought of Nancy Lammeter, and wooed her
with tacit patient worship, as the woman who made him
think of the future with joy: she would be his wife, and
would make home lovely to him, as his father's home had
never been; and it would be easy, when she was always near,
to shake off those foolish habits that were no pleasures, but
only a feverish way of annulling vacancy. Godfrey's was an
essentially domestic nature, bred up in a home where the
hearth had no smiles, and where the daily habits were not
chastised by the presence of household order. His easy disposition
made him fall in unresistingly with the family
courses, but the need of some tender permanent affection,
the longing for some influence that would make the good he
preferred easy to pursue, caused the neatness, purity, and
liberal orderliness of the Lammeter household, sunned by
the smile of Nancy, to seem like those fresh bright hours of
the morning when temptations go to sleep and leave the
ear open to the voice of the good angel, inviting industry,
sobriety, and peace. And yet the hope of this paradise had
not been enough to save him from a course which shut him
out of it for ever. Instead of keeping fast hold of the strong
silken rope by which Nancy would have drawn him safe to
the green banks where it was easy to step firmly, he had let
himself be dragged back into mud and slime, in which it
was useless to struggle. He had made ties for himself which
robbed him of all wholesome motives and were a constant
exasperation.
Still, there was one position worse than the present: it was
the position he would be in when the ugly secret was disclosed;
and the desire that continually triumphed over every
other was that of warding off the evil day, when he would
have to bear the consequences of his father's violent resentment
for the wound inflicted on his family pride - would
have, perhaps, to turn his back on that hereditary ease and
dignity which, after all, was a sort of reason for living, and
would carry with him the certainty that he was banished
for ever from the sight and esteem of Nancy Lammeter.
The longer the interval, the more chance there was of
deliverance from some, at least, of the hateful consequences
to which he had sold himself; the more opportunities remained
for him to snatch the strange gratification of
seeing Nancy, and gathering some faint indications of
her lingering regard. Towards this gratification he was
impelled, fitfully, every now and then, after having passed
weeks in which he had avoided her as the far-off bright-winged
prize that only made him spring forward and find
his chain all the more galling. One of those fits of yearning
was on him now, and it would have been strong enough to
have persuaded him to trust Wildfire to Dunstan rather than
disappoint the yearning, even if he had not had another
reason for his disinclination towards the morrow's hunt.
The other reason was the fact that the morning's meet was
near Batherley, the market-town where the unhappy woman
lived, whose image became more odious to him every day;
and to his thought the whole vicinage was haunted by her.
The yoke a man creates for himself by wrong-doing will
breed hate in the kindliest nature; and the good-humoured,
affectionate-hearted Godfrey Cass was fast becoming a bitter
man, visited by cruel wishes, that seemed to enter, and
depart, and enter again, like demons who had found in him
a ready-garnished home.
What was he to do this evening to pass the time? He
might as well go to the Rainbow, and hear the talk about the
cock-fighting: everybody was there, and what else was there
to be done? Though, for his own part, he did not care a
button for cock-fighting. Snuff, the brown spaniel, who had
placed herself in front of him, and had been watching him
for some time, now jumped up in impatience for the expected
caress. But Godfrey thrust her away without looking
at her, and left the room, followed humbly by the unresenting
Snuff - perhaps because she saw no other career open
to her.
DUNSTAN CASS, setting off in the raw morning, at the
judiciously quiet pace of a man who is obliged to ride to
cover on his hunter, had to take his way along the lane
which, at its farther extremity, passed by the piece of unenclosed
ground called the Stone-pit, where stood the cottage,
once a stone-cutter's shed, now for fifteen years inhabited by
Silas Marner. The spot looked very dreary at this season,
with the moist trodden clay about it, and the red, muddy
water high up in the deserted quarry. That was Dunstan's
first thought as he approached it; the second was, that the old
fool of a weaver, whose loom ha heard rattling already, had
a great deal of money hidden somewhere. How was it that
he, Dunstan Cass, who had often heard talk of Marner's
miserliness, had never thought of suggesting to Godfrey that
he should frighten or persuade the old fellow into lending
the money on the excellent security of the young Squire'd
prospects? The resource occurred to him now as so easy and
agreeable, especially as Marner's hoard was likely to be
large enough to leave Godfrey a handsome surplus beyond
his immediate needs, and enable him to accommodate his
faithful brother, that he had almost turned the horse's head
towards home again. Godfrey would be ready enough to
accept the suggestion: he would snatch eagerly at a plan
that might save him from parting with Wildfire. But when
Dunstan's meditation reached this point, the inclination to
go on grew strong and prevailed. He didn't want to give
Godfrey that pleasure: he preferred that Master Godfrey
should be vexed. Moreover, Dunstan enjoyed the self-important
consciousness of having a horse to sell, and the
opportunity of driving a bargain, swaggering, and possibly
taking somebody in. He might have all the satisfaction
attendant on selling his brother's horse, and not the less
have the further satisfaction of setting Godfrey to borrow
Marner's money. So he rode on to cover.
Bryce and Keating were there, as Dunstan was quite sure
they would be - he was such a lucky fellow.
"Hey-day," said Bryce, who had long had his eye on
Wildfire, "you're on your brother's horse today: how's
that?"
"O, I've swopped with him," said Dunstan, whose delight
in lying, grandly independent of utility, was not to be
diminished by the likelihood that his hearer would not
believe him - "Wildfire's mine now."
"What! has he swopped with you for that big-boned hack
of yours?" said Bryce, quite aware that he should get another
lie in answer.
"O, there was a little account between us," said Dunsey,
carelessly, "and Wildfire made it even. I accommodated him
by taking the horse, though it was against my will, for I'd
got an itch for a mare o'Jortin's - as rare a bit o'blood as
ever you threw your leg across. But I shall keep Wildfire, now
I've got him, though I'd bid of a hundred and fifty for him
the other day, from a man over at Flitton - he's buying for
Lord Cromleck - a fellow with a cast in his eye, and a green
waistcoat. But I mean to stick to Wildfire: I shan't get a
better at a fence in a hurry. The mare's got more blood, but
she's a bit too weak in the hind-quarters."
Bryce of course divined that Dunstan wanted to sell the
horse, and Dunstan knew that he divined it (horse-dealing is
only one of many human transactions carried on in this
ingenious manner); and they both considered that the bargain
was in its first stage, when Bryce replied ironically -
"I wonder at that now; I wonder you mean to keep him;
for I never heard of a man who didn't want to sell his horse
getting a bid of half as much again as the horse was worth.
You'll be lucky if you get a hundred."
Keating rode up now, and the transaction became more
complicated. It ended in the purchase of the horse by Bryce
for a hundred and twenty, to be paid on the delivery of
Wildfire, safe and sound, at the Batherley stables. It did
occur to Dunsey that it might be wise for him to give up the
day's hunting, proceed at once to Batherley, and, having
waited for Bryce's return, hire a horse to carry him home
with the money in his pocket. But the inclination for a run,
encouraged by confidence in his luck, and by a draught of
brandy from his pocket-pistol at the conclusion of the bargain,
was not easy to overcome, especially with a horse under
him that would take the fences to the admiration of the
field. Dunstan, however, took one fence too many, and got
his horse pierced with a hedge-stake. His own ill-favoured
person, which was quite unmarketable, escaped without injury,
but poor Wildfire, unconscious of his price, turned on
his flank, and painfully panted his last. It happened that
Dunstan, a short time before, having had to get down to
arrange his stirrup had muttered a good many curses at this
interruption, which had thrown him in the rear of the hunt
near the moment of glory, and under this exasperation had
taken the fences more blindly. He would soon have been up
with the hounds again, when the fatal accident happened;
and hence he was between eager riders in advance, not
troubling themselves about what happened behind them,
and far-off stragglers, who were as likely as not to pass quite
aloof from the line of road in which Wildfire had fallen.
Dunstan, whose nature it was to care more for immediate
annoyances than for remote consequences, no sooner recovered
his legs, and saw that it was all over with Wildfire,
that he felt a satisfaction at the absence of witnesses to a
position which no swaggering could make enviable. Reinforcing
himself, after his shake, with a little brandy and
much swearing, he walked as fast as he could to a coppice
on his right hand, through which it occurred to him that he
could make his way to Batherley without danger of encountering
any member of the hunt. His first intention was
to hire a horse there and ride home forthwith, for to walk
many miles without a gun in his hand and along an ordinary
road, was as much out of the question to him as to other
spirited young men of his kind. He did not much mind
about taking the bad news to Godfrey, for he had to offer
him at the same time the resource of Marner's money; and
if Godfrey kicked, as he always did, at the notion of making
a fresh debt from which he himself got the smallest share
of advantage, why, he wouldn't kick long: Dunstan felt
sure he could worry Godfrey into anything. The idea of
Marner's money kept growing in vividness, now the want of
it had become immediate; the prospect of having to make
his appearance with the muddy boots of a pedestrian at
Batherley, and to encounter the grinning queries of stable
men, stood unpleasantly in the way of his impatience to be
back at Raveloe and carry out his felicitous plan; and a
casual visitation of his waistcoat-pocket, as he was ruminating,
awakened his memory to the fact that the two or
three small coins his fore-finger encountered there, were of
too pale a colour to cover that small debt, without payment
of which the stable-keeper had declared he would never do
any more business with Dunsey Cass. After all, according to
the direction which the run had brought him, he was not
so very much farther from home than he was from Batherley;
but Dunsey, not being remarkable for clearness of head,
was only led to this conclusion by the gradual perception
that there were other reasons for choosing the unprecedented
course of walking home. It was now nearly four
o'clock, and a mist was gathering: the sooner he got into
the road the better. He remembered having crossed the road
and seen the finger-post only a little while before Wildfire
broke down; so, buttoning his coat, twisting the last of his
hunting-whip compactly round the handle, and rapping the
tops of his boots with a self-possessed air, as if to assure
himself that he was not at all taken by surprise, he set off with
the sense that he was undertaking a remarkable feat of
bodily exertion, which somehow and at some time he should
be able to dress up and magnify to the admiration of a select
circle at the Rainbow. When a young gentleman like Dunsey
is reduced to so exceptional a mode of locomotion as walking,
a whip in his hand is a desirable corrective to a too
bewildering dreamy sense of unwontedness in his position;
and Dunstan, as he went along through the gathering mist,
was always rapping his whip somewhere. It was Godfrey's
whip, which he had chosen to take without leave because it
had a gold handle; of course no one could see, when Dunstan
held it, that the name
Godfrey Cass
was cut in deep
letters
on that gold handle - they could only see that it was a very
handsome whip. Dunsey was not without fear that he might
meet some acquaintance in whose eyes he could cut a pitiable
figure, for mist is no screen when people get close to
each other; but when he at last found himself in the
well-known Raveloe lanes without having met a soul, he
silently remarked that that was part of his usual good-luck.
But now the mist, helped by the evening darkness, was more
of a screen than he desired, for it hid the ruts into which his
feet were liable to slip - hid everything, so that he had to
guide his steps by dragging his whip along the low bushes
in advance of the hedgerow. He must soon, he thought, be
getting near the opening at the Stone-pits: he should find
it out by the break in the hedgerow. He found it out, however,
by another circumstance which he had not expected -
namely, by certain gleams of light, which he presently
guessed to proceed from Silas Marner's cottage. That cottage
and the money hidden within it had been in his mind continually
during his walk, and he had been imagining ways
of cajoling and tempting the weaver to part with the immediate
possession of his money for the sake of receiving
interest. Dunstan felt as if there must be a little frightening
added to the cajolery, for his own arithmetical convictions
were not clear enough to afford him any forcible demonstration
as to the advantages of interest; and as for security,
he regarded it vaguely as a means of cheating a man by
making him believe that he would be paid. Altogether, the
operation on the miser's mind was a task that Godfrey
would be sure to hand over to his more daring and cunning
brother: Dunstan had made up his mind to that; and by the
time he saw the light gleaming through the chinks of Marner's
shutters, the idea of a dialogue with the weaver had
become so familiar to him, that it occurred to him as quite a
natural thing to make the acquaintance forthwith. There
might be several conveniences attending this course: the
weaver had possibly got a lantern, and Dunstan was tired of
feeling his way. He was still nearly three-quarters of a mile
from home, and the land was becoming unpleasantly slippery,
for the mist was passing into rain. He turned up the
bank, not without some fear lest he might miss the right
way, since he was not certain whether the light  were in
front or on the side of the cottage. But he felt the ground
before him cautiously with his whip-handle, and at last
arrived safely at the door. He knocked loudly, rather enjoying
the idea that the old fellow would be frightened at
the sudden noise. He heard no movement in reply: all was
silence in the cottage. Was the weaver gone to bed, then?
If so, why had he left a light? That was a strange forgetfulness
in a miser. Dunstan knocked still more loudly, and,
without pausing for a reply, pushed his fingers through the
latch-hole, intending to shake the door and pull the latch-string
up and down, not doubting that the door was
fastened. But, to his surprise, at this double motion the door
opened, and he found himself in front of a bright fire which
lit up every corner of the cottage - the bed, the loom, the
three chairs, and the table - and showed him that Marner
was not there.
Nothing at that moment could be much more inviting to
Dunsey than the bright fire on the brick hearth: he walked
in and seated himself by it at once. There was something
in front of the fire, too, that would have been inviting to a
hungry man, if it had been in a different stage of cooking.
It was a small bit of pork suspended from the kettle-hanger
by a string passed through a large door-key, in a way unknown
to primitive housekeepers unpossessed of jacks. But the pork
had been hung at the farthest extremity of the hanger,
apparently to prevent the roasting from proceeding too
rapidly during the owner's absence. The old staring simpleton
had hot meat for his supper, then? thought Dunstan.
People had always said he lived on mouldy bread, on purpose
to check his appetite. But where could he be at this
time, and on such an evening, leaving his supper in this
stage of preparation, and his door unfastened? Dunstan's
own recent difficulty in making his way suggested to him
fetch in fuel, or for some such brief purpose, and had
slipped into the Stone-pit. That was an interesting idea to
Dunstan, carrying consequences of entire novelty. If the
weaver was dead, who had a right to his money? Who would
know where his money was hidden?
option of viewing missed classes