
Project Proposal:  Kickoff KDE 4 Rewrite

This is a re-implementation of the Kickoff menu for KDE 3 originally created
by the OpenSuSE team.

Overall goals:

1. Implement the Kickoff user interface using Qt/KDE 4 technology

2. Make it easy for distributions to modify the menu contents

3. Make it easy for distributions to add their own branding

Detailed goals:

1.  Implement the Kickoff user interface using Qt/KDE 4 technology

    -> Clean separation of core and user interface
        -> eg. Make good use of Qt 4's model/view classes 
    -> Use Strigi for search and analysis (or possibly just Xesam interface?)
    -> Use Solid for getting data for removable device list
    -> Attractive, original, but not overbearing graphical effects
       using Qt 4's new painting and animation features.

    To decide on:

    -> Consult the Kickoff/KDE 3 developers and OpenSuSE users about 
       any desired changes to the user interface.
    -> Whether to use Plasma applets and widgets or Qt's widgets and
       QAbstractItemView as the base for the view classes.
    -> Provision of Plasma data engines for applets to use to query
       applications, recent files, favorites etc.
    -> Should facilities be provided for distributions to replace
       Strigi with their choice of search engine? 

    Ideas to explore in future:

    -> Use Sonnet for spell-checking the user's search query 
    -> Use Phonon for previews of audio and video content
       in the favorites and recently used sections
    -> Light KWin integration for interesting effects for revealing,
       hiding or rendering the Kickoff launcher on composited '3D'
       desktops. 

Goals 2 and 3 are derived from looking at the KDE 3 implementation 
of Kickoff and also the way in which distributions customise KDE.
Consulting distribution representatives is important to clarify 
these particular goals.

2.  Make it easy for distributions to modify the menu contents

    -> Different distributions may have different tools for system
       configuration ( eg. System Settings , YaST , Mandriva's tools )
    -> The available options on the leave page and the way in which 
       those tools work varies depending on the distribution

3.  Make it easy for distributions to add their own branding

    -> The launcher menu is a highly visible part of the desktop,
       distributions are therefore likely to want to brand it with
       their own logos, colors, icons etc.  
       This does not mean infinite theme-ability, but rather a good
       out-of-the-box look which distros can easily tweak so that 
       it is obvious which distribution is being used from looking
       at a screenshot, and also to allow distros to make some
       obvious cosmetic changes between versions.

       (See the Ubuntu art specs for example which state that each
        new version is supposed to have a visual look which is 
        distinct from the previous version)
